federalist 62
the senate for the independent journal
hamilton or madison to the people of the
state of new york
having examined the constitution of the
house of representatives and answered
such of the objections against it as
seemed to merit notice i enter next on
the examination of the senate
the heads into which this member of the
government may be considered are one the
qualification of senators two the
appointment of them by the state
legislatures
three the equality of representation in
the senate four the number of senators
and the term for which they are to be
elected
five the powers vested in the senate
one
the qualifications proposed for senators
as distinguished from those of
representatives consist in a more
advanced age and a longer period of
citizenship
a senator must be 30 years of age at
least as a representative must be 25 and
the former must have been a citizen nine
years as seven years are required for
the latter
the propriety of these distinctions is
explained by the nature of the
senatorial trust which requiring greater
extent of information and ability of
character requires at the same time that
the senator should have reached a period
of life most likely to supply these
advantages and which participating
immediately in transactions with foreign
nations ought to be exercised by none
who are not thoroughly weaned from the
pre-possessions and habits incident to
foreign birth and education
the term of nine years appears to be a
prudent mediocrity between a total
exclusion of adopted citizens whose
merits and talents may claim a share in
the public confidence and an
indiscriminate and hasty admission of
them which might create a channel for
foreign influence on the national
councils
2.
it is equally unnecessary to dilate on
the appointment of senators by the state
legislatures
among the various modes which might have
been devised for constituting this
branch of the government that which has
been proposed by the convention is
probably the most congenial with the
public opinion
it is recommended by the double
advantage of favoring a select
appointment and of giving to the state
government such an agency in the
formation of the federal government as
must secure the authority of the former
and may form a convenient link between
the two systems
three
the equality of representation in the
senate is another point which being
evidently the result of compromise
between the opposite pretensions of the
large and the small states does not call
for much discussion
if indeed it'd be right that among a
people thoroughly incorporated into one
nation every district ought to have a
proportional share in the government and
that among independent and sovereign
states bound together by a simple league
the parties however unequal in size
ought to have an equal share in the
common councils it does not appear to be
without some reason that in a compound
republic partaking both of the national
and federal character the government
ought to be founded on a mixture of the
principles of proportional and equal
representation but it is superfluous to
try by the standard of theory a part of
the constitution which is allowed on all
hands to be the result not of theory but
of a spirit of amity and that mutual
deference and concession which the
peculiarity of our political situation
rendered indispensable
a common government with powers equal to
its objects is called for by the voice
and still more loudly by the political
situation of america
a government founded on principles more
consonant to the wishes of the larger
states is not likely to be obtained from
the smaller states the only option then
for the former lies between the proposed
government and a government still more
objectionable
under this alternative the advice of
prudence must be to embrace the lesser
evil and instead of indulging a
fruitless anticipation of the possible
mischiefs which may ensue to contemplate
rather the advantageous consequences
which may qualify the sacrifice
in this spirit it may be remarked that
the equal vote allowed to each state is
at once a constitutional recognition of
the portion of sovereignty remaining in
the individual states and an instrument
for preserving that residuary
sovereignty
so far the equality ought to be no less
acceptable to the large than to the
small states since they are not less
solicitous to guard by every possible
expedient against an improper
consolidation of the states into one
simple republic
another advantage accruing from this
ingredient in the constitution of the
senate is the additional impediment it
must prove against improper acts of
legislation
no law or resolution can now be passed
without the concurrence first of a
majority of the people and then of a
majority of the states
it must be acknowledged that this
complicated check on legislation may in
some instances be injurious as well as
beneficial and that the peculiar defense
which it involves in favor of the
smaller states would be more rational if
any interests common to them and
distinct from those of the other states
would otherwise be exposed to peculiar
danger but as the larger states will
always be able by their power over the
supplies to defeat unreasonable
exertions of this prerogative of the
lesser states and as the faculty and
excess of law making seem to be the
diseases to which our governments are
most liable it is not impossible that
this part of the constitution may be
more convenient in practice than it
appears to many in contemplation
four
the number of senators and the duration
of their appointment come next to be
considered
in order to form an accurate judgment on
both of these points it will be proper
to inquire into the purposes which are
to be answered by a senate and in order
to ascertain these it will be necessary
to review the inconveniences which a
republic must suffer from the want of
such an institution
first
it is a misfortune incident to
republican government though in less
degree than to other governments that
those who administer it may forget their
obligations to their constituents and
prove unfaithful to their important
trust
in this point of view a senate as a
second branch of the legislative
assembly distinct from and dividing the
power with a first must be in all cases
a salutary check on the government
it doubles the security to the people by
requiring the concurrence of two
distinct bodies in schemes of usurpation
or perfidy where the ambition or
corruption of one would otherwise be
sufficient
this is a precaution founded on such
clear principles and now so well
understood in the united states that it
would be more than superfluous to
enlarge on it
i will barely remark that as the
improbability of sinister combinations
will be in proportion to the
dissimilarity in the genius of the two
bodies it must be politic to distinguish
them from each other by every
circumstance which will consist with a
due harmony in all proper measures and
with the genuine principles of
republican government
secondly the necessity of a senate is
not less indicated by the propensity of
all single and numerous assemblies to
yield to the impulse of sudden and
violent passions and to be seduced by
factious leaders into intemperate and
pernicious resolutions
examples on this subject might be cited
without number and from proceedings
within the united states as well as from
the history of other nations but a
position that will not be contradicted
need not be proved
all that need be remarked is that a body
which is to correct this infirmity ought
itself to be free from it and
consequently ought to be less numerous
it ought moreover to possess great
firmness and consequently ought to hold
its authority by a tenure of
considerable duration
thirdly another defect to be supplied by
a senate lies in a want of due
acquaintance with the objects and
principles of legislation
it is not possible that an assembly of
men called for the most part from
pursuits of a private nature continued
an appointment for a short time and led
by no permanent motive to devote the
intervals of public occupation to a
study of the laws the affairs and the
comprehensive interests of their country
should if left holy to themselves escape
a variety of important errors in the
exercise of their legislative trust
it may be affirmed on the best grounds
that no small share of the present
embarrassments of america is to be
charged on the blunders of our
governments and that these have
proceeded from the heads rather than the
hearts of most of the authors of them
what indeed are all the repealing
explaining and amending laws which fill
and disgrace our voluminous codes but so
many monuments of deficient wisdom so
many impeachments exhibited by each
succeeding against each preceding
session so many admonitions to the
people of the value of those aids which
may be expected from a well-constituted
senate
a good government implies two things
first fidelity to the object of
government which is the happiness of the
people secondly a knowledge of the means
by which that object can be best
obtained
some governments are deficient in both
these qualities most governments are
deficient in the first i scruple not to
assert that in american governments too
little attention has been paid to the
last
the federal constitution avoids this
error and what merits particular notice
it provides for the last in a mode which
increases the security for the first
fourthly the mutability in the public
councils arising from a rapid succession
of new members however qualified they
may be points out in the strongest
manner the necessity of some stable
institution in the government
every new election in the states is
found to change one half of the
representatives from this change of men
must proceed a change of opinions and
from a change of opinions a change of
measures but a continual change even of
good measures is inconsistent with every
rule of prudence and every prospect of
success
the remark is verified in private life
and becomes more just as well as more
important in national transactions
5.
to trace the mischievous effects of a
mutable government would fill a volume i
will hint a few only each of which will
be perceived to be a source of
innumerable others
in the first place it forfeits the
respect and confidence of other nations
and all the advantages connected with
national character
an individual who is observed to be
inconsistent to his plans or perhaps to
carry on his affairs without any plan at
all is marked at once by all prudent
people as a speedy victim to his own
unsteadiness and folly
his more friendly neighbors may pity him
but all will decline to connect their
fortunes with his and not a few will
cease the opportunity of making their
fortunes out of his
one nation is to another what one
individual is to another with this
melancholy distinction perhaps that the
former with fewer of the benevolent
emotions than the latter are under fewer
restraints also from taking undue
advantage from the indiscretions of each
other
every nation consequently whose affairs
betray a want of wisdom and stability
may calculate on every loss which can be
sustained from the more systematic
policy of their wiser neighbors but the
best instruction on this subject is
unhappily conveyed to america by the
example of her own situation
she finds that she is held in no respect
by her friends that she is the derision
of her enemies and that she is a prey to
every nation which has an interest in
speculating on her fluctuating councils
and embarrassed affairs
the internal effects of immutable policy
are still more calamitous
it poisons the blessing of liberty
itself it will be of little avail to the
people that the laws are made by men of
their own choice if the laws be so
voluminous that they cannot be read or
so incoherent that they cannot be
understood if they be repealed or
revised before they are promulgated or
undergo such incessant changes that no
man who knows what the law is today can
guess what it will be tomorrow
law is defined to be a rule of action
but how can that be a rule which is
little-known and less fixed
another effect of public instability is
the unreasonable advantage it gives to
the sagacious the enterprising and the
moneyed few over the industrious and
uniformed mass of the people
every new regulation concerning commerce
or revenue or in any way affecting the
value of the different species of
property presents a new harvest to those
who watch the change and can trace its
consequences a harvest reared not by
themselves but by the toils and cares of
the great body of their fellow citizens
this is a state of things in which it
may be said with some truth that laws
are made for the few not for the many
in another point of view great injury
results from an unstable government
the want of confidence in the public
councils damps every useful undertaking
the success and profit of which may
depend on a continuance of existing
arrangements
what prudent merchant will hazard his
fortunes in any new branch of commerce
when he knows not but that his plans may
be rendered unlawful before they can be
executed
what farmer or manufacturer will lay
himself out for the encouragement given
to any particular cultivation or
establishment when he can have no
assurance that his preparatory labors
and advances will not render him a
victim to an inconstant government
in a word no great improvement or
laudable enterprise can go forward which
requires the auspices of a steady system
of national policy but the most
deplorable effect of all is the
diminution of attachment and reverence
which steals into the hearts of the
people towards a political system which
betrays so many marks of infirmity and
disappoints so many of their flattering
hopes
no government any more than an
individual will long be respected
without being truly respectable nor be
truly respectable without possessing a
certain portion of order and stability
publius